Some points to remember with regards to speed and duplex negotiation and mismatches.
Duplex and speed mismatches occur when auto negotiation fails
or where manual configurations are mismatched.
So for example one side is configured to use full duplex
and the other side is configured to use half duplex.
Auto negotiation may fail because of physical problems in the network
such as cabling problems or a hub somewhere in the network.
Duplex mismatch is do cause performance problems, your pings may succeed
but the movement of large files may be negatively affected
and UDP may especially have problem with recovering from duplex mismatch issues.
So a quick bit of history, originally Ethernet was half duplex
because devices were connected to hubs, so a decision was made that when you can’t
negotiate with the other side, you would revert back to 10 Meg half duplex
all the devices weren't designed to auto negotiate
so the auto negotiating device would revert back to half duplex mode
if it wasn’t able to negotiate with the other side because it assumed that
that device must only support half duplex.
Autonegotiation of speed and duplex didn’t work well in the old days
and often caused problems with the speed and duplex mismatch.
If 1 side is using half duplex and the other side is using full duplex.
The full duplex side thinks that it can transmit it
any time even when it's receiving traffic, the half duplex side however because it uses
Carrier Sense Multiple Access Collision Detection or CSMA/SD
will want the line to be clear before transmitting
and when it does transmit and the packet is transmitted
by the other side running a full duplex a collision occurs
so the half duplex side will back off because of the collision
and then try to transmit again when the line is clear
and we'll have this constant issue of a late collisions
where the full duplex side is transmitting data and can starve the half duplex side
In other words it can use up all the bandwidth causing a lot of collisions
and retransmissions on a half duplex side.
This would cause the frames on a half duplex side to queue up and eventually be drop.
When looking for problems have a look at the errors which I'll demonstrate
in the moment, on the full duplex side you will see errors such as your CRC errors
on half duplex side you typically see late collisions
and perhaps buffer over loading.
Management systems from company such as SolarWinds
and others allow you to see where you’ve got duplex problem on your network
and help you resolve these issues more easily.